# Pointer Complications

Let's talk about pointers. As a quick refresher, pointers hold the
location of a slot in memory. You can then manipulate this location,
either by dereferencing it and getting the items that are being pointed
to, or by moving the pointer around with pointer addition.

In C/C++, arrays and pointers are pretty similar, so you can loop
through an array using a pointer.

Take this program, which prints out 1 to 5:

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    int x[] = {1,2,3,4,5};
    int* start = x;
    int* end = x + 5;
    for (; start < end; start++) { printf("%d, ", *start); }
}
```

Pointers are useful in many cases -- if you want to represent a
recursive data structure, you can do so with pointers:

```c
struct Node {
    int value;
    struct Node* next;
};
```

Also, if you want to just listen to an update to some other memory, you
can do so with pointers. Without them, or some related construct, any
update to would have to be written to all the listeners, which could be
very expensive.

But this makes optimizing code much harder.

Take this simple example:

```c
int is_a(char *a, char *b) {
    *a = 'a';
    *b = 'b';
    return *a == 'a';
}
```

Since we set the `a` pointer to 'a', and the `b` pointer to 'b', and
then check if the `a` pointer is 'a', this should just be `return 1`.
However, the `a` pointer and the `b` pointer could be the same pointer.

But the function allows us to pass the same pointer as `a` and `b`,
which breaks this assumption:

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>

int is_a(char *a, char *b) {
    *a = 'a';
    *b = 'b';
    return *a == 'a';
}

int main() {
    char* a = malloc(sizeof(char));
    printf("is_a, %d", is_a(a, a));
}
```

In which case this returns 0.

If there was some way to say that pointer `a` and pointer `b` could not
be the same pointer, then we could do this optimization.

C does have a keyword, `restrict` that hints to the compiler that the
memory locations do not alias (they don't intersect), but in this case
it doesn't generate any better code and it isn't a compile time
restriction, so this keyword isn't useful in this case.

## How do you represent a pointer?

Recently, I've been working on a C compiler, and got to the point where
I had to support pointers in C.

Most people think that a pointer is a *number* (with its length being your
computer's word size, normally 64 bits these days), but that doesn't
work. In the previous example above, I did pointer arithmetic on an
`int* start`, with `start++` (increment start by 1). However, since an
`int` is 4 bytes, and since each increment prints the next number, this
actually increments the pointer by 4 bytes. But if I had a `char*`,
since `char` is 1 byte, incrementing a `char` increments the pointer by
1 byte.

On top of its size, a pointer also needs to store its type (since you
can't pass a pointer of a different type to a function that wants a
specific pointer), but you also need to support casting.

A pointer can be cast to a number, or to another pointer type. If cast
to a number, and then back to a pointer, what happens to its type
information, or its size? Does it disappear?  Some important questions
to ponder.

Also, you'd want to have type-safety with pointers. It would be odd to
take a pointer to an int and then change it to a pointer to another
type, like an array. It makes sense to increment or decrement the
pointer to an array, but not for a pointer to an int. If this is the
case, then pointers should also hold their type.

On top of that, pointers can point to initialized or uninitialized
memory. So that needs to be handled too -- in C++, the `end` pointer of
a collection always points to one past the end of a collection, which is
generally uninitialized.

Also for optimization reasons, it's also useful to know if pointers
*alias*, or if a certain location in memory is only accessible by one
pointer or multiple. In the `is_a` example above, if we know that the
two pointers are different and cannot access the same location,
then we can emit "return true" for the function. But that also requires
keeping track of where it came from, which is called *provenance*. This
information is important for optimizations, but also useful for error
messages to the user -- if the compiler knows where a pointer came from,
and the user tries to use it incorrectly, it'll have more information
about how things went wrong.

Pointers are complicated. They're also not just a number.
