# The Interpreter Pattern

Of all the design patterns in all the world, this one is my favorite.
The interpreter pattern involves encoding the actions a user can take
through an app into a clean structure and interpreting that.

This is useful for many reasons: video games use this extensively -- if
you want your players to be able to "mod" the game and change things
about it, they have to provide a recipe that your game can read, and
voila -- they can extend your game.

Want to provide replays? You can create a video player in your game that
reads a stream of instructions and displays those actions on the screen,
thereby compressing the replay file to just a set of binary encoded
instructions.

Say you want to add redo and undo to your application. If you do it
normally, you can't do undo anything, because you've deleted the
previous state of the application, and can't undo the mutation. With
actions, you can define a redo and undo for each action, thereby adding
that to your app.

Say you want to test your application by giving it a valid set of
instructions and making sure it does the right thing. If you don't have a set
of instructions to pass in, and the app can't execute them, you're out
of luck.
But if you can, you can randomly generate a set of instructions and see
if you get the result you want, or scaffold a test that does a specific
set of actions and verifies its output.
You can even take this to an extreme and fuzz your entire application
this way.

There's many other things you can do by turning an application into one
that interprets a set of instructions, but these were the ones that came
to my mind.

