# Learning: A ChatGPT Based Approach

Recently I've subscribed to ChatGPT to get ChatGPT 4 as a tool to help
teach myself math. It's a great tool in the toolbelt for breaking down
hard concepts.

I really like the problem solving approach, where the textbook has some
light exposition on its topics and lots of problems.

The problems are where the hard work gets done -- learning inside your
brain.

But most textbooks aren't geared towards self-learners -- they rarely
have solutions and even the ones that do may have incorrect or terse
solutions. Since you want (preferably) multiple solutions to an answer,
that won't fly. ChatGPT solves that problem by being the bridge between
problem and solution.

You can ask it to drill deep into one part of the problem, rephrase the
problem another way, give similar problems to a problem, ask about
certain concepts and many more. The sky is the limit. The math is a lagniappe.

You can learn almost any concept you'd like as well, being mindful of
hallucinations -- but that's not that big of a downside.

When I was younger, I researched topics through the library. I'd find
some "authoritative source" (whatever that means) which was usually a
fairly dated book, skim it, find the main ideas, and engage with it,
either choosing to devote more time to fully reading it or giving up
there. Those books had plenty of "hallucinations", where they mixed up
historical facts or had a message to push. In the humanities, you can't
get a purely objective view of the world, even for the smallest events
and ideas. You have to side with the author or against the author
sometimes, and find other sources that agree or disagree with the points
you're currently reading.

In other words, gaining knowledge has always been lossy, and always will
be lossy. Using an LLM in this way is no different than opening up a book
at the library -- it's an adversarial experience.
